PUSH_CHECKLIST.md, before:

# Pre-Push Checklist

## ✅ Code Quality
- [x] No syntax errors
- [x] No linter errors
- [x] No TODO/FIXME comments
- [x] Type hints and docstrings present
- [x] Consistent code style

## ✅ Documentation
- [x] Comprehensive README.md
- [x] Updated claude.md (AI context)
- [x] Data directory README
- [x] Outputs directory README
- [x] LICENSE file added

## ✅ Project Structure
- [x] Clean directory structure
- [x] Proper .gitignore (excludes data/, outputs/, __pycache__)
- [x] All source files organized in src/
- [x] Scripts in scripts/
- [x] Configuration centralized in config.py

## ✅ Configuration
- [x] All filtering parameters documented
- [x] Visualization settings configurable
- [x] Clear parameter descriptions

## Ready to Push
The codebase is clean and ready for version control.

### To initialize git repository:
```bash
git init
git add .
git commit -m "Initial commit: Favela morphometric analysis pipeline"
```

### Files to commit:
- All source code (src/, scripts/)
- Documentation (README.md, LICENSE, claude.md)
- Configuration files (requirements.txt, .gitignore)
- README files in data/ and outputs/

### Files excluded (via .gitignore):
- data/ directory
- outputs/ directory
- __pycache__/
- *.pyc files
- IDE files

Commit message:

Add: Street-level Sky exposure plane and section views

PUSH_CHECKLIST.md, after:

# Pre-Push Checklist

## ✅ Code Quality
- [x] No syntax errors
- [x] No linter errors
- [x] No TODO/FIXME comments
- [x] Type hints and docstrings present
- [x] Consistent code style

## ✅ Documentation
- [x] Comprehensive README.md
- [x] Updated claude.md (AI context)
- [x] Data directory README
- [x] Outputs directory README
- [x] LICENSE file added
- [x] Updated all docs for unified sky exposure analysis
- [x] Legacy script marked as deprecated

## ✅ Project Structure
- [x] Clean directory structure
- [x] Proper .gitignore (excludes data/, outputs/, __pycache__)
- [x] All source files organized in src/
- [x] Scripts in scripts/
- [x] Configuration centralized in config.py

## ✅ Configuration
- [x] All filtering parameters documented
- [x] Visualization settings configurable
- [x] Clear parameter descriptions

## Ready to Push
The codebase is clean and ready for version control.

### To initialize git repository:
```bash
git init
git add .
git commit -m "Initial commit: Favela morphometric analysis pipeline"
```

### Files to commit:
- All source code (src/, scripts/)
- Documentation (README.md, LICENSE, claude.md)
- Configuration files (requirements.txt, .gitignore)
- README files in data/ and outputs/

### Files excluded (via .gitignore):
- data/ directory
- outputs/ directory
- __pycache__/
- *.pyc files
- IDE files
